\chapter{Introduction}

\label{chapter_introduction}
% XXX  La introducción debe llevar todos los elementos necesarios de notación, definiciones báscias, fórmulas, etc, que se usan en los capítulos de la tesis

%----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

\section{Context and Rationale}

The analysis and prediction of financial signals are fundamental challenges in finance, with direct implications for investment decision-making, risk management, and market stability. These challenges arise from the complex, dynamic, and often non-linear nature of financial data, which include time series of asset prices, credit risk indicators, and volatility measures. Traditionally, statistical and econometric methods, or linear regressions, have formed the basis for modeling these phenomena. However, the exponential increase in the volume of financial data, along with its growing heterogeneity, has highlighted the limitations of these conventional techniques in effectively capturing complex patterns and temporal dependencies.

In this context, Deep Learning (DL) and Machine Learning (ML) techniques have emerged as transformative tools in financial analysis. These methodologies allow for the modeling of non-linear relationships between variables, learning from large volumes of data, and making accurate predictions in noisy and dynamic environments such as financial markets. For instance, Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) have shown advancements in predicting financial time series, while Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) have opened new possibilities for simulating synthetic data. Despite their potential, the application of DL and ML in finance faces significant challenges, such as the interpretability of models, the risk of overfitting, and the need for advanced computational resources.

This thesis is positioned at the intersection of finance and artificial intelligence, exploring how DL techniques and mathematical algorithms can address key problems in the analysis and prediction of financial signals. Specifically, it focuses on three critical areas: asset volatility estimation, generation of synthetic financial time series, and credit rating prediction. These areas are of great practical relevance for investors, risk managers, and regulators, while also offering opportunities to advance the state-of-the-art in financial modeling.

The current state of knowledge reflects a growing interest in integrating DL and ML into finance. In the realm of volatility, recent research has utilized models such as RNNs and GANs to overcome the limitations of traditional methods like GARCH, which assume Gaussian distributions and fail to capture anomalous dynamics. In credit ratings, ML-based approaches have allowed for the incorporation of a larger number of variables and improved predictive accuracy compared to classical statistical methods. Finally, the simulation of synthetic time series has gained attention as a tool for training models in markets with limited historical data, with TimeGAN being highlighted for replicating complex financial patterns. A key concept underpinning parts of this research is Anomalous Diffusion (AD). AD describes transport phenomena where the mean-square displacement (MSD) of a particle does not scale linearly with time, deviating from classical diffusion. This behavior, often linked to non-equilibrium phenomena, can shed light on underlying mechanisms in various systems, including financial domains. Integrating insights from anomalous diffusion into financial analysis could significantly improve our understanding of market behaviors. In the context of this thesis, AD principles are combined with machine learning to estimate the volatility of assets. The AnDi Challenge, for instance, has spurred the development of methods to characterize anomalous diffusion processes using machine learning and statistical methods. However, opportunities remain for better integrating physical concepts, such as anomalous diffusion, with these advanced techniques, as well as for evaluating their practical applicability in real-world financial scenarios.  




\section{Thesis Objectives}

The general objective of this thesis is to develop and evaluate Deep Learning techniques and mathematical algorithms for the analysis and prediction of financial signals, with a focus on three of the main topics that financial analysts are interested in: volatility, time series, and risk (credit ratings). This objective is broken down into three specific objectives, each associated with an article in the compendium, which contribute complementarily to the central purpose:

\begin{itemize}
\item \textbf{Article 1: Volatility as an anomalous diffusion process}
\begin{itemize}
\item \textbf{Specific objective:} To estimate the volatility of financial assets using the anomalous diffusion exponent and to classify market movements into specific diffusion models (ATTM, CTRW, FBM, LW, SBM).
\item \textbf{Contribution:} To introduce an innovative measure of volatility based on physics concepts, such as anomalous diffusion, to offer a more detailed view of market dynamics compared to traditional metrics.
\end{itemize}
\item \textbf{Article 2: Generation of trajectories with TimeGAN to model anomalous diffusion in financial markets}
\begin{itemize}
\item \textbf{Specific objective:} To utilize TimeGAN to generate synthetic datasets that reproduce statistical and temporal patterns of anomalous diffusion models, with an emphasis on Fractional Brownian Motion (FBM) and stock returns.
\item \textbf{Contribution:} To provide a tool for generating realistic synthetic data, useful for training models in markets with scarce historical data, thereby expanding financial simulation capabilities.
\end{itemize}
\item \textbf{Article 3: Estimation of credit ratings with Machine Learning techniques}
\begin{itemize}
\item \textbf{Specific objective:} To develop a model to predict corporate credit ratings using financial ratios and sectoral data, improving accuracy and interpretability.
\item \textbf{Contribution:} To increase the accuracy of credit rating predictions through advanced ML models and explainability techniques, such as SHAP, with direct applications in risk assessment.
\end{itemize}
\end{itemize}  

\subsection{Background}

The analysis and prediction of financial signals have been central themes in financial research, driven by the need to understand and anticipate market behavior in complex and dynamic environments. The scientific literature has addressed this challenge from multiple perspectives, including statistical and econometric methods, and more recently, machine learning (ML) and deep learning (DL) techniques. Below is a critical review of the main approaches related to the three thematic axes of the thesis: volatility estimation, credit rating prediction, and the generation of synthetic financial time series.

In the field of financial volatility, traditional econometric models, such as ARCH, GARCH, historical standard deviation or implied volatility, have been widely used to model the conditional variance of financial time series. These models assume that returns follow Gaussian distributions or distributions with heavy tails but have limitations in capturing non-linear or anomalous dynamics, such as those observed during periods of high volatility or financial crises. In recent years, research has explored DL-based approaches, such as Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) and their variants, like Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) and Bidirectional LSTM (BLSTM), to model complex temporal dependencies in financial series. For example, recent studies have used RNNs to predict implied volatility, highlighting their ability to learn non-linear patterns compared to traditional methods. Furthermore, concepts from physics, such as anomalous diffusion (AD), have begun to be integrated into financial analysis to describe price movements that do not follow standard Brownian processes. AD describes transport processes where the mean-square displacement (MSD) deviates from linear scaling with time. This framework is relevant for financial markets as it can provide a more nuanced understanding of volatility by characterizing the nature of price movements (e.g., sub-diffusive, super-diffusive). The AnDi Challenge, for example, has focused on characterizing anomalous diffusion processes through machine learning, and its application in finance involves using the diffusion exponent as a novel volatility measure and classifying market movements into specific diffusion models (ATTM, CTRW, FBM, LW, SBM). Despite these advances, its practical application remains somewhat limited.  

In the area of synthetic data generation, Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) have emerged as a powerful tool for simulating time series in domains with limited data. In finance, models like TimeGAN have been proposed to generate synthetic financial trajectories that preserve the statistical and temporal properties of real data. These techniques are particularly useful in emerging markets or for assets with short histories where historical data is scarce. Nonetheless, the literature has identified difficulties in generating series that replicate complex patterns, such as those associated with anomalous diffusion—a phenomenon characterizing many financial markets due to their long-term temporal dependencies and non-Gaussian behaviors. TimeGAN aims to create synthetic datasets that mirror these statistical and temporal patterns, with a particular interest in models like Fractional Brownian Motion (FBM), which is prevalent in financial markets.  

In the field of credit ratings, classical statistical methods, such as logistic regressions and linear probability models, have dominated credit risk prediction. These approaches typically rely on financial ratios and macroeconomic variables, but their predictive capacity is restricted by their linearity and the difficulty of incorporating large volumes of heterogeneous data. Recently, ML techniques, such as Random Forest, XGBoost, and LightGBM, have gained relevance for their ability to model non-linear relationships and improve accuracy in predicting credit ratings. However, a persistent challenge is the lack of interpretability of these models, limiting their adoption in regulated environments where transparency is essential. Explainability methods, such as SHAP (SHapley Additive exPlanations), have begun to be used to address this problem, although their integration into financial models is still incipient.  

\subsection{Areas for Advancement}

Despite advances in the literature, several areas offer opportunities for improvement, justifying the need for this research and the contributions of the articles in this compendium:

\begin{itemize}
\item \textbf{In volatility estimation:} Although DL-based models like LSTM and BLSTM have improved volatility prediction, the integration of physical concepts, such as anomalous diffusion, offers further avenues for exploration. Traditional methods like GARCH do not adequately capture the anomalous dynamics of markets, and conventional volatility metrics (e.g., standard deviation) lack the capacity to describe complex market regimes. There is an opportunity to further develop volatility measures that combine interdisciplinary approaches to offer a deeper understanding of price fluctuations. The use of the anomalous diffusion exponent, as explored in this thesis, represents one such advancement, providing novel perspectives on stock market volatility by differentiating between sub-diffusion, super-diffusion, and normal diffusion.  

\item \textbf{In credit rating prediction:} ML models have demonstrated superiority over statistical methods, but the lack of interpretability remains a hurdle for their adoption in regulated financial contexts. While techniques like SHAP have begun to be used, there is scope for more systematic integration of explainability into complex ML models for credit ratings. Enhancing the interpretability of these models can improve their practical applicability in risk management and financial decision-making.

\item \textbf{In synthetic data generation:} The application of TimeGAN in finance is promising, yet there is a need for approaches that specifically model anomalous diffusion patterns in financial time series. Generating synthetic data that accurately replicates the statistical and dynamic properties of real markets, especially in scenarios of high volatility or complex temporal dependencies, remains an area for development. Furthermore, the evaluation of synthetic data quality in terms of its utility for training predictive models requires greater attention. This thesis explores using TimeGAN to generate synthetic datasets mirroring anomalous diffusion models, particularly FBM, and assesses their quality in terms of classifying diffusion types and regressing the anomalous diffusion exponent.

\end{itemize}

The articles in this thesis address these areas by introducing a new volatility measure based on anomalous diffusion, developing an interpretable model for credit ratings using ML and SHAP, and proposing a TimeGAN-based approach to generate synthetic time series that model anomalous diffusion, thereby contributing to the advancement of knowledge in these areas.

\subsection{Theoretical Framework}

This research is grounded in an interdisciplinary theoretical framework that combines concepts from quantitative finance, machine learning, deep learning, and the physics of complex systems. The main theoretical foundations and key concepts are as follows:

\begin{itemize}
\item \textbf{Anomalous Diffusion (AD):} Derived from statistical physics, this concept describes transport processes that do not follow standard Brownian motion, characterized by an anomalous diffusion exponent ($\alpha$) that indicates the degree of anomaly in the trajectories. In finance, AD is relevant for modeling price movements with long-term temporal dependencies and non-Gaussian distributions, such as those observed in Fractional Brownian Motion (FBM) or the Lévy Walk (LW) model. The AnDi Challenge has been instrumental in promoting research in this area, focusing on characterizing AD from trajectory data using machine learning. This framework guides the volatility analysis in the first article, providing a theoretical basis for estimating and classifying market dynamics.  

\item \textbf{Deep Learning for Time Series:} Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs), particularly LSTM and BLSTM, are fundamental for modeling temporal sequences with long-term dependencies. These architectures are based on deep learning theory, which allows for learning complex data representations through neural layers. In the context of this thesis, LSTMs and BLSTMs are used to process financial time series, capturing dynamic patterns in volatility and synthetic trajectories.

\item \textbf{Machine Learning and Explainability:} Ensemble models, such as Random Forest, XGBoost, and LightGBM, are based on statistical learning theory, which seeks to minimize predictive errors by combining multiple weak learners. Explainability, based on SHAP values, is derived from cooperative game theory, where the contributions of each variable are quantified based on their impact on predictions. This framework is central to the third article (on credit ratings), which prioritizes transparency in prediction.

\item \textbf{Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs):} GANs, and particularly TimeGAN, are based on game theory and adversarial learning, where a generator and a discriminator compete to produce synthetic data indistinguishable from real data. TimeGAN extends this framework by incorporating recurrent and supervised components to capture temporal dependencies in financial series. This concept underpins the third article (on synthetic data generation), which uses TimeGAN to generate synthetic trajectories modeling anomalous diffusion.

\end{itemize}

These theoretical frameworks provide a solid foundation for the analysis and interpretation of the thesis results. The integration of anomalous diffusion with DL and ML techniques allows financial problems to be addressed from a novel perspective, while explainability and synthetic data generation approaches ensure the practical relevance and scalability of the proposed solutions.

\section{General Methodology}

Although each article employs specific methodologies adapted to its particular problem, the thesis adopts an integrative approach that combines Deep Learning, Machine Learning, and classical financial algorithms. The main methods include:

\begin{itemize}
\item \textbf{LSTM and BLSTM Neural Networks:} In the analysis of financial asset volatility, Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) and Bidirectional LSTM (BLSTM) networks are employed to model long-term temporal dependencies in financial time series. These architectures are particularly effective for capturing complex patterns and non-linear dynamics in the closing prices of the S\&P 500 (2012-2024), as detailed in the article on volatility as an anomalous diffusion process. LSTMs allow for processing temporal sequences while maintaining relevant information over time, whereas BLSTMs, by analyzing series in both forward and backward directions, improve precision in estimating the anomalous diffusion exponent and classifying diffusion models (ATTM, CTRW, FBM, LW, SBM).
\item \textbf{Ensemble Models (Random Forest, XGBoost, LightGBM):} Used in the article on credit rating prediction, these methods are applied in classification and regression tasks due to their robustness and ability to handle large heterogeneous datasets. Random Forest and XGBoost excel at modeling non-linear relationships between financial ratios and sectoral data, while LightGBM offers advantages in computational efficiency, achieving superior accuracy in predicting corporate credit ratings.
\item \textbf{Generative Adversarial Networks (TimeGAN):} In the article on trajectory generation, TimeGAN, a specific GAN architecture designed for time series, is used to create synthetic data that replicate statistical and temporal patterns of anomalous diffusion models, especially Fractional Brownian Motion (FBM). TimeGAN combines a generator and a discriminator with recurrent and supervised components, ensuring that synthetic series preserve the dynamic properties of real financial data.
\item \textbf{Explainability Techniques (SHAP):} Implemented in the article on credit ratings, SHAP (SHapley Additive exPlanations) values are used to interpret the predictions of machine learning models. This technique provides local and global explanations of the model's decisions, identifying the contribution of each variable (e.g., financial ratios) to the rating prediction, which enhances transparency and practical applicability in risk management.
\end{itemize}  

\section{Contributions and Originality}

This thesis makes significant contributions to the field of financial signal analysis and prediction by integrating concepts from deep learning, machine learning, and mathematical algorithms with practical applications in finance. The contributions are derived from the three articles that make up the compendium and focus on addressing key problems in volatility estimation, credit rating prediction, and financial data simulation. These contributions not only enrich theoretical knowledge but also offer innovative tools for investors, risk managers, and financial regulators. The main contributions and their originality are detailed below:

\begin{itemize}
\item \textbf{Novel volatility measure based on the anomalous diffusion exponent:}
The first article introduces a pioneering methodology to estimate the volatility of financial assets using the anomalous diffusion exponent, a concept derived from statistical physics that describes non-stationary and non-linear processes in complex systems. Unlike traditional volatility metrics, such as standard deviation or ARCH/GARCH models, which assume Gaussian distributions and do not capture anomalous market dynamics, this new measure provides a more precise characterization of price fluctuations by modeling market movements as diffusion processes (ATTM, CTRW, FBM, LW, SBM).
The originality of this contribution lies in the interdisciplinary integration of physical concepts with deep learning techniques, specifically LSTM and BLSTM networks, to calculate the diffusion exponent from financial time series, such as the S\&P 500 closing prices (2012-2024). The results show that this measure not only correlates strongly with historical and implied volatility but also allows for a more detailed classification of market regimes (e.g., periods of high or low volatility) than conventional methods.
From a practical standpoint, this contribution has direct applications in portfolio management, risk assessment, and the construction of hedging strategies, as it offers financial analysts a tool to anticipate dynamic changes in volatility. Academically, it establishes a bridge between the physics of complex systems and quantitative finance, opening new research lines for modeling financial markets as non-linear dynamic systems.  


\item \textbf{Generation of realistic synthetic data using TimeGAN to model anomalous diffusion in financial markets:}
The second article proposes the use of Time-GAN, a Generative Adversarial Network architecture designed for time series, to generate synthetic datasets that replicate the statistical and temporal patterns of anomalous diffusion models, with a particular focus on Fractional Brownian Motion (FBM). This technique allows for simulating realistic financial trajectories, such as those of the S\&P 500, in scenarios where historical data is limited or insufficient for training predictive models.
The originality of this contribution lies in adapting TimeGAN to capture the properties of anomalous diffusion, a prevalent phenomenon in financial markets that reflects long-term temporal dependencies and non-Gaussian behaviors. The generated synthetic data achieve 90\% accuracy in classifying diffusion models and a Mean Absolute Error (MAE) of 0.12 in regressing the diffusion exponent on real data, although accuracy decreases on synthetic data due to the difficulty of replicating extreme volatilities.
From a practical perspective, this tool is invaluable for simulating market scenarios, training trading algorithms, or performing stress tests on investment portfolios, especially in emerging markets or for assets with little data history. Academically, this contribution advances the field of synthetic data generation by integrating concepts of anomalous diffusion with generative deep learning, offering a methodological framework that can be extended to other domains, such as meteorology or biology, where time series exhibit similar behaviors.
Furthermore, the use of TimeGAN in this context addresses the challenge of data scarcity in finance, allowing researchers and practitioners to explore hypothetical scenarios with a high degree of realism, representing a significant advancement in financial simulation.

\item \textbf{Improved credit rating prediction through machine learning and explainability techniques (SHAP):}
The third article develops an advanced model for predicting corporate credit ratings using machine learning techniques such as Random Forest, XGBoost, and LightGBM, and applying SHAP values to ensure the interpretability of predictions. This approach significantly improves predictive accuracy compared to traditional statistical methods like logistic regressions, achieving 64\% exact accuracy and 73\% within $\pm 1$ category on a dataset of over 10,000 companies (2014-2024).
The originality of this contribution resides in combining highly robust ensemble models with explainability techniques that break down the contribution of each variable (e.g., financial ratios like debt/EBITDA or sectoral data) in the model's predictions. This not only increases confidence in the results but also makes the predictions actionable for financial decision-makers, such as banks, rating agencies, and risk managers. For example, SHAP values allow for identifying which specific factors (like leverage or liquidity) have the greatest impact on a credit rating, facilitating a more informed risk assessment.
In practical terms, this model has applications in credit assessment, loan underwriting, and regulatory supervision by providing an accurate and transparent tool for anticipating credit risk. Academically, it contributes to the field of machine learning applied to finance by demonstrating how explainability techniques can bridge the gap between complex models and their adoption in regulated environments where interpretability is crucial.

\end{itemize}

The overall originality of the thesis lies in its interdisciplinary approach, combining artificial intelligence tools with concepts from physics and mathematics to address complex financial problems. By integrating anomalous diffusion with deep learning, improving the interpretability of predictive models, and developing generative methods for synthetic data, this research not only addresses current limitations in the state of the art but also establishes a solid foundation for future research in quantitative finance and applied machine learning. The contributions have a direct impact on financial practice by providing tools that enhance decision-making in uncertain environments, and in academia by proposing new paradigms for modeling and simulating financial systems.

\section{Thesis Structure}

\begin{itemize}
\item \textbf{Chapter 1:} Introduction.
\item \textbf{Chapter 2: Stock volatility as an anomalous diffusion process:}\newline
Anomalous diffusion (AD) describes transport phenomena where the mean-square displacement (MSD) of a particle does not scale linearly with time, deviating from classical diffusion. This behavior, often linked to non-equilibrium phenomena, sheds light on the underlying mechanisms in various systems, including biological and financial domains.

Integrating insights from anomalous diffusion into financial analysis could significantly improve our understanding of market behaviors, similar to their impacts on biological systems. In financial markets, accurately estimating asset volatility—whether historical or implied—is vital for investors.

We introduce a novel methodology to estimate the volatility of stocks and similar assets, combining anomalous diffusion principles with machine learning. Our architecture combines convolutional and recurrent neural networks (bidirectional Long Short-Term Memory units). Our model computes the diffusion exponent
of a financial time series to measure its volatility and it categorizes market movements into five diffusion models: Annealed Transit Time Model (ATTM), Continuous Time Random Walk (CTRW), Fractional Brownian Motion (FBM), Levy Walk (LW), and Scaled Brownian Motion (SBM).

Our findings suggest that the diffusion exponent derived from anomalous diffusion processes provides insightful and novel perspectives on stock market volatility. By differentiating between sub-diffusion, super-diffusion, and normal diffusion, our methodology offers a more nuanced understanding of market dynamics than traditional volatility metrics.
\item \textbf{Chapter 2: TimeGAN for Modeling Anomalous Diffusion in Financial Markets:} 
This research investigates the generation of synthetic time series to emulate the dynamics of financial markets, specifically targeting Spain’s IBEX 35 index, using the TimeGAN model, a generative adversarial network designed for sequential data. Our primary goal is to produce artificial datasets that replicate the statistical and temporal characteristics of real stock market data, including volatility, to enhance predictive algorithms and support strategic financial decision-making. We employ Random Forest models for classification and regression to evaluate the synthetic data’s fidelity, focusing on their alignment with anomalous diffusion models like Fractional Brownian Motion, which is prevalent in financial systems. The classification model achieves 91\% accuracy on original data, correctly identifying diffusion types, but synthetic data performance drops to 32\%, indicating challenges in capturing data variability and market fluctuations. Regression estimates the diffusion exponent with a mean absolute error of 0.12 for real data, rising to 0.35 for synthetic series, suggesting moderate success in modeling subdiffusive behavior. These findings highlight the potential of synthetic data for training models in markets with limited historical records, offering a scalable approach to financial simulations. However, limitations in replicating volatility underscore the need for refined generative techniques to fully capture complex market dynamics, paving the way for future improvements in computational resources and model architectures.

\item \textbf{Chapter 3: Credit Rating Estimation with Machine Learning Techniques:} A company's credit rating is one of the primary indicators of solvency and credit risk that investors consider when deciding to invest in a company. It can be a decisive factor in some investment decisions. However, not all companies have a credit rating, as it requires companies to pay rating agencies for evaluation. The present work develops a model to estimate the credit rating of any company based on its financial metrics and sector. Our model leverages key financial ratios such as liquidity, leverage, profitability, and solvency indicators to approximate ratings assigned by established agencies like Standard \& Poor's (S\&P), Moody's, and Fitch. 

We have compiled a dataset covering over 10,000 companies across multiple sectors from 2014 to 2024 and we have applyed statistical and machine learning techniques to enhance rating prediction accuracy. The study compares traditional regression approaches, including linear and logistic regression, with advanced models such as Random Forest, XGBoost and Light GBM to identify the most effective methodology. A critical aspect of our approach is ensuring interpretability in rating predictions. Utilizing SHapley Additive exPlanations (SHAP), we provide both global and local explanations of how financial metrics influence the estimated ratings, making the model more transparent and practical for investors and analysts. Our findings contribute to financial risk assessment, valuation processes, investment decision-making, credit evaluation, and corporate managers seeking to assess credit risk with greater precision.

\item \textbf{Chapter 4: } Credit ratings with ML. (Corresponds to Article 3 in the original list, Article 2 here for flow)
\item \textbf{Chapter 5:} Conclusions and future work.





\end{itemize}
